README.md, before:

# Science

My (public) science work.

## 2016-06-27 

I created a BEAST2 tutorial to add a tree prior [here ](https://github.com/richelbilderbeek/Java/blob/master/Beast2TutorialCreateNewTreePrior/CreateNewTreePrior.md). I also notified the original BEAST2 authors to let them use it as well.

## 2015-06-16

Reminder to self: [Statistical Retrinking](http://xcelab.net/rm/statistical-rethinking) by Richard McElreath appears to become an awesome statistics book! 

## 2015-03-26

Luke Harmon sent me his excellent presentation he gave at 
a minisymposium for the thesis defence of Thijs Janzen. You
can get the PDF [here](Harmon2015/groningen_harmon_2015.pdf).

## 2015-03-20

I replicated the likelihood calculations by Nee at al. (1994) in R
and created a nice PDF to accompany it.

 * [R script](NeeEtAl1994/NeeEtAl1994.R)
 * [PDF](NeeEtAl1994/NeeEtAl1994.pdf)

## 2015-03-18

Worked on coalescent theory and nicely document.

 * [PDF](CoalescentTheory/CoalescentTheory.pdf)

## 2015-03-17

Thanks Wikipedia for this [list of mathematical operators](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_mathematical_symbols_by_subject)!

## 2015-03-13

I worked hard to replicate the likelihood calculations by Nee at al. (1994) and put my calculations in the folder NeeEtAl1994. I ended up using the likelihood functions of the DDD (Etienne & Haegeman) and LASER (Rabosky & Schliep) packages. Unsurprisingly, they give the same results (note that DDD uses a proxy for the likelihood, instead of the true likelihood). The expoTree package, however, I could not put it to good use.

 * [My R script](NeeEtAl1994/NeeEtAl1994.R)

### References

 * Nee, Sean, Robert M. May, and Paul H. Harvey. "The reconstructed evolutionary process." Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 344.1309 (1994): 305-311.

## 2015-01-20

Freek de Haas allowed me to put his, IMHO, excellent presentation online. It is [here (.ODP)](Presentations/FreekDeHaas2015ModelingMacroEvolutionaryProcesses.odp).

## 2014-10-16

I'd love to have a section called 'Biology' here

![Screenshot](20141016.png)

Commit message:

Moved article discussion and TRES meeting here

README.md, after:

# Science

My (public) science work.

## TRESentation by Bilderbeek 

I gave a TRES presentation at November 23rd 2015, you can view it [here](Bilderbeek20151123TresMeeting/20151123TresMeeting.pdf).

## Article discussion Cadotte 2015 by Bisschop and Bilderbeek 

We, as TECE, discussed the article `Phylogenetic diversity–ecosystem function relationships are insensitive to phylogenetic edge lengths` by Marc W. Cadotte. Presentation [here](BisschopAndBilderbeek20150630ArticleDiscussionCadotte2015/Cadotte2015.pdf).


## 2015-06-27 

I created a BEAST2 tutorial to add a tree prior [here ](https://github.com/richelbilderbeek/Java/blob/master/Beast2TutorialCreateNewTreePrior/CreateNewTreePrior.md). I also notified the original BEAST2 authors to let them use it as well.

## 2015-06-16

Reminder to self: [Statistical Retrinking](http://xcelab.net/rm/statistical-rethinking) by Richard McElreath appears to become an awesome statistics book! 

## 2015-03-26

Luke Harmon sent me his excellent presentation he gave at 
a minisymposium for the thesis defence of Thijs Janzen. You
can get the PDF [here](Harmon2015/groningen_harmon_2015.pdf).

## 2015-03-20

I replicated the likelihood calculations by Nee at al. (1994) in R
and created a nice PDF to accompany it.

 * [R script](NeeEtAl1994/NeeEtAl1994.R)
 * [PDF](NeeEtAl1994/NeeEtAl1994.pdf)

## 2015-03-18

Worked on coalescent theory and nicely document.

 * [PDF](CoalescentTheory/CoalescentTheory.pdf)

## 2015-03-17

Thanks Wikipedia for this [list of mathematical operators](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_mathematical_symbols_by_subject)!

## 2015-03-13

I worked hard to replicate the likelihood calculations by Nee at al. (1994) and put my calculations in the folder NeeEtAl1994. I ended up using the likelihood functions of the DDD (Etienne & Haegeman) and LASER (Rabosky & Schliep) packages. Unsurprisingly, they give the same results (note that DDD uses a proxy for the likelihood, instead of the true likelihood). The expoTree package, however, I could not put it to good use.

 * [My R script](NeeEtAl1994/NeeEtAl1994.R)

### References

 * Nee, Sean, Robert M. May, and Paul H. Harvey. "The reconstructed evolutionary process." Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 344.1309 (1994): 305-311.

## 2015-01-20

Freek de Haas allowed me to put his, IMHO, excellent presentation online. It is [here (.ODP)](Presentations/FreekDeHaas2015ModelingMacroEvolutionaryProcesses.odp).

## 2014-10-16

I'd love to have a section called 'Biology' here

![Screenshot](20141016.png)
